Description of the GFF3 Format

GFF3 files are nine-column, tab-delimited, plain text files. Literal use of
tab, newline, carriage return, the percent (%) sign, and control characters
must be encoded using RFC 3986 Percent-Encoding; no other characters may be
encoded. Backslash and other ad-hoc escaping conventions that have been added
to the GFF format are not allowed. The file contents may include any character
in the set supported by the operating environment, although for portability
with other systems, use of UTF-8 is recommended.

    tab (%09)
    newline (%0A)
    carriage return (%0D)
    % percent (%25)
    control characters (%00 through %1F, %7F)

In addition, the following characters have reserved meanings in column 9 and
must be escaped when used in other contexts:

    ; semicolon (%3B)
    = equals (%3D)
    & ampersand (%26)
    , comma (%2C)

Note that unescaped spaces are allowed within fields, meaning that parsers must
split on tabs, not spaces. Use of the "+" (plus) character to encode spaces is
deprecated from early versions of the spec and is no longer allowed.

Undefined fields are replaced with the "." character, as described in the
original GFF spec.

Column 1: "seqid"
The ID of the landmark used to establish the coordinate system for the
current feature. IDs may contain any characters, but must escape any characters
not in the set [a-zA-Z0-9.:^*$@!+_?-|]. In particular, IDs may not contain
unescaped whitespace and must not begin with an unescaped ">".

Column 2: "source"
The source is a free text qualifier intended to describe the algorithm or
operating procedure that generated this feature. Typically this is the name of
a piece of software, such as "Genescan" or a database name, such as "Genbank."
In effect, the source is used to extend the feature ontology by adding a
qualifier to the type creating a new composite type that is a subclass of the
type in the type column.

Column 3: "type"
The type of the feature (previously called the "method"). This is constrained
to be either a term from the Sequence Ontology or an SO accession number. The
latter alternative is distinguished using the syntax SO:000000. In either case,
it must be sequence_feature (SO:0000110) or an is_a child of it.

Columns 4 & 5: "start" and "end"
The start and end coordinates of the feature are given in positive 1-based
integer coordinates, relative to the landmark given in column one. Start is
always less than or equal to end. For features that cross the origin of a
circular feature (e.g. most bacterial genomes, plasmids, and some viral
genomes), the requirement for start to be less than or equal to end is
satisfied by making end = the position of the end + the length of the landmark
feature.

For zero-length features, such as insertion sites, start equals end and the
implied site is to the right of the indicated base in the direction of the
landmark.

Column 6: "score"
The score of the feature, a floating point number. As in earlier versions of
the format, the semantics of the score are ill-defined. It is strongly
recommended that E-values be used for sequence similarity features, and that
P-values be used for ab initio gene prediction features.

Column 7: "strand"
The strand of the feature. + for positive strand (relative to the landmark), -
for minus strand, and . for features that are not stranded. In addition, ? can
be used for features whose strandedness is relevant, but unknown.

Column 8: "phase"
For features of type "CDS", the phase indicates where the next codon begins
relative to the 5' end (where the 5' end of the CDS is relative to the strand
of the CDS feature) of the current CDS feature. For clarification the 5' end
for CDS features on the plus strand is the feature's start and and the 5' end
for CDS features on the minus strand is the feature's end. The phase is one of
the integers 0, 1, or 2, indicating the number of bases forward from the start
of the current CDS feature the next codon begins. A phase of "0" indicates that
a codon begins on the first nucleotide of the CDS feature (i.e. 0 bases
forward), a phase of "1" indicates that the codon begins at the second
nucleotide of this CDS feature and a phase of "2" indicates that the codon
begins at the third nucleotide of this region. Note that ‘Phase’ in the context
of a GFF3 CDS feature should not be confused with the similar concept of frame
that is also a common concept in bioinformatics. Frame is generally calculated
as a value for a given base relative to the start of the complete open reading
frame (ORF) or the codon (e.g. modulo 3) while CDS phase describes the start of
the next codon relative to a given CDS feature.

The phase is REQUIRED for all CDS features.

Column 9: "attributes"
	A list of feature attributes in the format tag=value. Multiple tag=value
pairs are separated by semicolons. URL escaping rules are used for tags or
values containing the following characters: ",=;". Spaces are allowed in this
field, but tabs must be replaced with the %09 URL escape. Attribute values do
not need to be and should not be quoted. The quotes should be included as part
of the value by parsers and not stripped.

These tags have predefined meanings:

ID
Indicates the ID of the feature. The ID attribute is required for features that
have children (e.g. gene and mRNAs), or for those that span multiple lines, but
are optional for other features. IDs for each feature must be unique within the
scope of the GFF file. In the case of discontinuous features (i.e. a single
feature that exists over multiple genomic locations) the same ID may appear on
multiple lines. All lines that share an ID must collectively represent a single
feature.

Name
Display name for the feature. This is the name to be displayed to the user.
Unlike IDs, there is no requirement that the Name be unique within the file.

Alias
A secondary name for the feature. It is suggested that this tag be used
whenever a secondary identifier for the feature is needed, such as locus names
and accession numbers. Unlike ID, there is no requirement that Alias be unique
within the file.

Parent
Indicates the parent of the feature. A parent ID can be used to group exons
into transcripts, transcripts into genes, an so forth. A feature may have
multiple parents. Parent can only be used to indicate a partof relationship.

Target
Indicates the target of a nucleotide-to-nucleotide or protein-to-nucleotide
alignment. The format of the value is "target_id start end [strand]", where
strand is optional and may be "+" or "-". If the target_id contains spaces,
they must be escaped as hex escape %20.

Gap
The alignment of the feature to the target if the two are not collinear (e.g.
contain gaps). The alignment format is inspired from the CIGAR format described
in the Exonerate documentation.

Derives_from
Used to disambiguate the relationship between one feature and another when the
relationship is a temporal one rather than a purely structural "part of" one.
This is needed for polycistronic genes. See "PATHOLOGICAL CASES" for further
discussion.

Note
A free text note.

Dbxref
A database cross reference. See the section "Ontology Associations and Db Cross
References" for details on the format.

Ontology_term
A cross reference to an ontology term. See the section "Ontology Associations
and Db Cross References" for details.

Is_circular
A flag to indicate whether a feature is circular. See extended discussion
below.

Multiple attributes of the same type are indicated by separating the values
with the comma "," character, as in:

Parent=AF2312,AB2812,abc-3

In addition to Parent, the Alias, Note, Dbxref and Ontology_term attributes can
have multiple values.

Note that attribute names are case sensitive. "Parent" is not the same as
"parent".

All attributes that begin with an uppercase letter are reserved for later use.
Attributes that begin with a lowercase letter can be used freely by
applications.

Types:
BAC_cloned_genomic_insert
breakpoint
CDS
chromosome
chromosome_band
complex_substitution
CRMs
deletion
DNA_motif
enhancer
exon
exon_junction
five_prime_UTR
gene
golden_path_region
insertion_site
insulator
intron
mature_peptide
miRNA
modified_RNA_base_feature
mRNA
ncRNA
oligonucleotide
origin_of_replication
orthologous_region
orthologous_to
pcr_product
point_mutation
polyA_site
pre_miRNA
protein
protein_binding_site
pseudogene
region
regulatory_region
repeat_region
rescue_fragment
RNAi_reagent
rRNA
sequence_variant
silencer
snoRNA
snRNA
syntenic_region
tandem_repeat
TF_binding_site
three_prime_UTR
transcription_start_site
transposable_element
transposable_element_insertion_site
tRNA
uncharacterized_change_in_nucleotide_sequence
